The goal of this section of the course is to learn a Python module called sympy. Sympy is a really
powerful module in Python for learning mathematics because it's going to allow you to represent variables
as symbols, which is very different from how computers normally represent variables and numbers.
So I'm going to first explain the difference between the symbolic numbers and numeric or analytic numbers
and then I'll show you how to create and work with these variables in python, and a little bit about
printing.
So let's begin.
If you were asked to write down on a piece of paper the square root of two you would probably write
down something that looks like this.
This we call symbolic math because you're not actually evaluating the entire square root of two. In fact,
this is an irrational number.
So for all we know it basically goes on to infinity with no end.
So this is a symbolic representation of the square root of two.
But if you would type
square root of two into a calculator or Python or matlab or any other numerical processing software,
you might get something that looks like this.
This is does not look like the square root of 2.
This is the square root of 2 evaluated to, you know, 15 decimal points or however many numbers this is
here.
So this is sometimes called numerical or analytical or variable precision notation.
And this is symbolic notation.
So here we have a few other examples.
This is pi.
So this is the symbol for Pi.
This is not pi.
This is the estimate of Pi rounded off to, whatever it is, 15 decimal points.
Actually now I'm curious how many.
This is...
There are in fact 15 decimal points here, which I promise I didn't know beforehand I was just guessing
15.
It turned out to be a lucky guess.
OK.
The point is: this is the symbol for Pi.
This is not pi.
This is just pi evaluated out to 15 decimal points and then you can get some weird things in computers
that are called Computer rounding errors.
So if you were to evaluate the cosine of pi over two, your math teacher and your math textbook will tell
you that the cosine of pi over 2 is 0.
However, if you would actually type in cosine of pi over two into Python or any other numerical processing
software, you would probably not get zero.
You would get something that looks like this: six point something something something and then at the
end here you see e to the minus 17.
This is called scientific notation.
I'm going to have an entire lecture just about scientific notation in the next section of this course
in the algebra section.
However, for now suffice it to say this is a really tiny number.
What this actually means is move this decimal point to the left 17 numbers, so 17 places off to the left.
So this is a tiny tiny number; it's ten to the minus 17. But it's not zero.
OK.
And the reason why this is not zero is that computers have a very difficult time with representing exact
zero and computing exact zero, in part because this symbol pi is really represented in the computer not
as what we think of as pi but as this number or a number that looks something like this.
OK.
So I hope you now see the difference between symbolic numbers and analytical or variable precision numbers.
The goal of the sympy module in Python is to allow you to work with symbolic numbers like this, to work
with symbols for the square root of two instead of you know this whole business here and this is going
to really unlock the power of python as a tool for learning mathematics.
All right.
So what we're going to do now is switch to Python and I will introduce you to sympy. Sympy is not
in the basic Python package.
So we need to import it so I can type import Sympy as sym.
So that means that if we want to access functions and objects that are in the sympy module, you would
have to type sym dot.
And now I'm going to press tab and this is going to show me a list of all of the functions in the sympy
toolbox.
Now don't worry, you don't need to memorize this list, you're not going to use every single function in
the sympy toolbox.
So let me get rid of this. So the first thing we're going to do is create some symbolic variables in sympy.
So I'm going to say X equals sym dot symbols so we can create a symbol for the variable x and set that
equal to x. And now when I run this I can type X. And now what is x? x is just... X. I haven't assigned it
a number or a string I haven't said X equals anything.
So X is just X. It's just a symbol x.
So that's for one variable. You can create multiple variables at the same time using commas like this.
I say X comma Y equals symbol symbols X comma y. In single quotes here.
Okay.
Now notice that this is not just a variable like any other variable.
If I were to say Z Python gives me an error it says name Z is not defined.
I haven't defined any variable called Z but I have defined a variable called Y.
I created it up here, and I created it to be a symbol.
So it just is Y.
So that means I can write x plus 4 for example, or sorry, y plus 4.
And when I run this code the output is... well it's just y plus four. So four is a number, y is a symbol.
I haven't defined any other number or anything else for y to be so it's just y.
It just is what it is.
Now in sympy, we can make symbolic numbers or symbolic variables be printed in a slightly nicer way
than the python default.
And to do that I'm going to use.
I'm going to activate sym dot init printing. so sym dot init printing, with parentheses because
it's a function. And you really only need to run a line of code like this once.
I'm going to run this cell again and notice the difference between how y plus 4 looks now and how
it looks now.
So it's basically the same of course, it's still y plus 4, but the font is a little bit nicer and you'll
see pretty soon that we get some nicer looking formatting.
Okay.
Now I also want to show you using the function display and I've introduced you to this function previously
in this course and you'll remember that that needs to come in from the IPython module, so IPython dot
display and then import display.
Okay so I'm going to run all this code again.
And now let's see what we can do with display. Actually, first I want to say just print x let's say x
to the power of y.
So this just gives me x asterisk asterisk y.
But now if I write display and I run the same input, so x to the power of y into the display function,
then that's going to print this out in a nicer looking, more kind of mathematical way.
So it says X and then in these superscript we get the Y.
Similarly, I can write display x divided by y and now I get a nice looking fraction: x divided by Y.
Okay.
And what I'd like to do now is show you or highlight the difference between symbolic math and analytic
math.
So to do that I'm going to compare the square root of two between sympy and numpy.
And this is essentially what I showed in the slides a few moments ago.
So we need to import numpy as np, and then... actually, you know, it's generally good Python programming
etiquette to put all of the importing at the at the top in one cell in the beginning.
Okay.
So now this is pretty interesting because I can say display.
Let's start with numpy.
So if I say numpy the square root of 2, that's going to display the square root of two.
And now to be clear, this is not actually the square root of 2.
This is the estimate of the square root of 2, or the computation of the square root of 2,
up to 15 decimal places.
But if we were to repeat the same procedures I would say copy and paste but now instead of numpy I
want to call sympy.
So sym dot square root of 2 and notice that this is just the square root of 2.
So this is a symbol for the square root of 2.
So here are the three exercises for this video.
Essentially, what you want to do is just print out these expressions using the display function and sympy,
and see if you can get these expressions to print out exactly like this and you'll see what happens.
All right.
So now I'm going to solve these exercises on my own. Now, notice if you're starting from a clean slate,
if you're starting from a fresh IPython workbook, you will need to run this line of code, so you need
to import sympy and you'll need to import display.
But I already have those.
Oh and you will also need to create X and Y to be symbolic variables.
But of course I've already done those. So I'm just going to proceed with coding immediately.
So let's see.
So the first exercise was to print out y times X squared.
So let's say Y times X asterisk asterisk 2.
Okay so this is kind of correct, in the sense that this is really y times X squared.
However what I showed in the slides was y
and then there was a multiplication symbol and then X squared.
So what the display function did with these symbolic variables is two things: First of all, it reordered
the variables, so it put the squared term first, which of course is the same: x squared times Y is the
same thing as Y times X squared.
But the order reversed and it didn't put in a multiplication sign; it just put these variables next to
each other.
So this answer isn't wrong, however, it's not really what I showed in the slides.
So let's move on to the next one.
This one was display and then I wanted to show the square root of 4.
So the square root of 4 times X... huh.
Now that's also interesting.
This is definitely not what I typed so I typed the square root of 4 and actually python just evaluated
this and told me that the square root of 4 is 2 times x.
So again this isn't really the wrong answer per se.
However, it's not exactly printing out the way that I had wanted it to.
So you can probably see where this is going.
I'm going to try the third exercise. That was to display sym square root of X times sym dot square
root of square root of x.
So here we just get an x.
Now of course this makes sense, because the square root of x times the square root of X gives us x.
So the moral of this story here -- what you see here from these exercises -- is that using the sympy toolbox
is actually really powerful, but for displaying the variables the way that you want with maximal control,
it's not sufficient just to have the display function and then put your variables inside the display
function.
Instead, you're going to need to learn a little bit more, and that is LaTeX.
Now I've already introduced latex coding a little bit in previous videos in this course, but the difference
between this and this is why we need to learn LaTeX.
So in this video I introduced you to symbolic variables and the sympy module in Python. I showed
you how to print out some nice looking expressions, mathematical expressions, using the display function
and the sympy toolbox. In the next video, I'm going to show you how to take this one step further
using LaTeX.